gemini-templates/gemini-cli-template/README.md, before:

# Gemini CLI Gold Standard Template

A zero-trust baseline configuration for the Gemini CLI ecosystem. This monolithic `.gemini/` template uses Just-In-Time (JIT) context routing and MCP-driven memory to run agentic workflows.

## Quickstart

Follow these steps to initialize the template in a new or existing project and trigger your first autonomous workflow:

1. **Prerequisites:** Ensure you have Node.js and `npx` installed globally. If you plan to migrate an existing Gemini setup, you must also have `jq` installed.
2. **Installation:** Download and execute the initialization script in the root of your target project:
   ```bash
   curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mentatzoe/Drops-of-slop/main/gemini-templates/gemini-cli-template/init-gemini.sh -o init-gemini.sh
   chmod +x init-gemini.sh
   ./init-gemini.sh
   ```
3. **Start a Session:** Launch the Gemini CLI in your project directory:
   ```bash
   gemini chat
   ```
4. **Trigger the Workflow:** Ask Gemini to build a new feature by explicitly triggering the Architect agent:
   ```text
   "I want to build a new feature. Please trigger the Architect."
   ```

## Architecture: JIT Context Routing

This template uses a single, centralized `.gemini/` directory. Rather than physically swapping files in and out, the root `GEMINI.md` file acts as a global capability router.

When you initiate a session, `GEMINI.md` analyzes your request and dynamically delegates tasks to one of 14+ specialized subagents located in `.agents/`. The CLI loads only the relevant persona and its specific tools into context. This prevents context bloat and maintains a single source of truth.

### Migrating Existing Projects

If you already have a `.gemini/` workspace initialized, `init-gemini.sh` will safely adapt your architecture without destroying your context:

1. **Automated Backup:** The script detects existing setups and prompts for migration, silently backing up your legacy files to a `.gemini.backup_<timestamp>` folder.
2. **Deep Merging (Phase 1):** It merges your existing `settings.json` with the new template using `jq`. This retains your custom MCP servers alongside the new zero-trust security hooks.
3. **Semantic Mapping (Phase 2):** To enforce the strict JIT routing constraints, the script overwrites the root `GEMINI.md`. It will instruct you to manually copy any custom system prompts from your backup into the appropriate specialized overlay agents (or define a new one).

### The Autonomous Workflow

For any new feature request or complex build, the template enforces a 3-stage autonomous pipeline.

1. **Architect (`@architect.md`):** Acts as a systems designer. It interviews you (strict limit of 3-5 questions) to resolve ambiguities and synthesizes a formal specification into a transient `.gemini/active-plan.md` file.
2. **Planner (`@planner.md`):** A completely read-only agent that investigates your codebase. It appends a visual, step-by-step implementation checklist (`- [ ]`) inside `.gemini/active-plan.md` and pauses for your explicit approval in the chat.
3. **Implementer (`@implementer.md`):** The execution agent. Once you say "Proceed", it follows the approved plan. It performs soft guardrail checks using meta-commentary and checks off items (- [x]) as it builds the application.

## Memory Protocol

Native flat-file persistence is strictly restricted.

To prevent context fragmentation, the template routes persistent memory operations exclusively through external MCPs (specifically, the `engram` graph database).

- **Auto-Update:** When you share a fact about your profile, preferences, or a system decision, the agents silently log it using the `engram:mem_save` tool.
- **Workflow State:** Short-term orchestration relies entirely on ephemeral local state (`.gemini/active-plan.md`), which is globally `.geminiignore`d so it does not pollute your Git history.

## Security & Hooks

Operating under a secure-by-design philosophy, the repository hardens the execution sandbox:

- **BeforeTool Hook:** `.gemini/hooks/block-secrets.sh` parses all arguments before shell executions and regex-blocks exposed API keys/secrets before they reach your system terminal.
- **AfterTool Hook:** `.gemini/hooks/audit-logger.sh` creates a local timeline log of all commands executed by Gemini.
- **Guardrails:** `.gemini/policies/guardrails.toml` restricts highly dangerous shell commands (e.g., `rm -rf`, `sudo`). It requires agents to write meta-commentary to explain their reasoning before executing native commands.

Commit message:

feat: add non-destructive update-gemini.sh script

gemini-templates/gemini-cli-template/README.md, after:

# Gemini CLI Gold Standard Template

A zero-trust baseline configuration for the Gemini CLI ecosystem. This monolithic `.gemini/` template uses Just-In-Time (JIT) context routing and MCP-driven memory to run agentic workflows.

## Quickstart

Follow these steps to initialize the template in a new or existing project and trigger your first autonomous workflow:

1. **Prerequisites:** Ensure you have Node.js and `npx` installed globally. If you plan to migrate an existing Gemini setup, you must also have `jq` installed.
2. **Installation:** Download and execute the initialization script in the root of your target project:
   ```bash
   curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mentatzoe/Drops-of-slop/main/gemini-templates/gemini-cli-template/init-gemini.sh -o init-gemini.sh
   chmod +x init-gemini.sh
   ./init-gemini.sh
   ```
3. **Start a Session:** Launch the Gemini CLI in your project directory:
   ```bash
   gemini chat
   ```
4. **Trigger the Workflow:** Ask Gemini to build a new feature by explicitly triggering the Architect agent:
   ```text
   "I want to build a new feature. Please trigger the Architect."
   ```

## Architecture: JIT Context Routing

This template uses a single, centralized `.gemini/` directory. Rather than physically swapping files in and out, the root `GEMINI.md` file acts as a global capability router.

When you initiate a session, `GEMINI.md` analyzes your request and dynamically delegates tasks to one of 14+ specialized subagents located in `.agents/`. The CLI loads only the relevant persona and its specific tools into context. This prevents context bloat and maintains a single source of truth.

### Migrating Existing Projects

If you already have a `.gemini/` workspace initialized (pre-Gold Standard), `init-gemini.sh` will safely adapt your architecture:

1. **Automated Backup:** The script detects existing setups and prompts for migration, silently backing up your legacy files to a `.gemini.backup_<timestamp>` folder.
2. **Deep Merging (Phase 1):** It merges your existing `settings.json` with the new template using `jq`. This retains your custom MCP servers alongside the new zero-trust security hooks.
3. **Semantic Mapping (Phase 2):** To enforce the strict JIT routing constraints, the script overwrites the root `GEMINI.md`. It will instruct you to manually copy any custom system prompts from your backup into the appropriate specialized overlay agents (or define a new one).

### Receiving Upstream Updates

Once migrated to the Gold Standard, you can periodically receive new capabilities (like the Catalog Manager and Standalone Browser) by running the recurring update script. This script performs a safe 3-way merge and preserves your local `GEMINI.md`:

```bash
curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mentatzoe/Drops-of-slop/main/gemini-templates/gemini-cli-template/update-gemini.sh -o update-gemini.sh
chmod +x update-gemini.sh
./update-gemini.sh --version=main
```

### The Autonomous Workflow

For any new feature request or complex build, the template enforces a 3-stage autonomous pipeline.

1. **Architect (`@architect.md`):** Acts as a systems designer. It interviews you (strict limit of 3-5 questions) to resolve ambiguities and synthesizes a formal specification into a transient `.gemini/active-plan.md` file.
2. **Planner (`@planner.md`):** A completely read-only agent that investigates your codebase. It appends a visual, step-by-step implementation checklist (`- [ ]`) inside `.gemini/active-plan.md` and pauses for your explicit approval in the chat.
3. **Implementer (`@implementer.md`):** The execution agent. Once you say "Proceed", it follows the approved plan. It performs soft guardrail checks using meta-commentary and checks off items (- [x]) as it builds the application.

## Memory Protocol

Native flat-file persistence is strictly restricted.

To prevent context fragmentation, the template routes persistent memory operations exclusively through external MCPs (specifically, the `engram` graph database).

- **Auto-Update:** When you share a fact about your profile, preferences, or a system decision, the agents silently log it using the `engram:mem_save` tool.
- **Workflow State:** Short-term orchestration relies entirely on ephemeral local state (`.gemini/active-plan.md`), which is globally `.geminiignore`d so it does not pollute your Git history.

## Security & Hooks

Operating under a secure-by-design philosophy, the repository hardens the execution sandbox:

- **BeforeTool Hook:** `.gemini/hooks/block-secrets.sh` parses all arguments before shell executions and regex-blocks exposed API keys/secrets before they reach your system terminal.
- **AfterTool Hook:** `.gemini/hooks/audit-logger.sh` creates a local timeline log of all commands executed by Gemini.
- **Guardrails:** `.gemini/policies/guardrails.toml` restricts highly dangerous shell commands (e.g., `rm -rf`, `sudo`). It requires agents to write meta-commentary to explain their reasoning before executing native commands.
